## Exploring Global Databases

Modern applications are specialized on handling use cases and scenarios deemed impossible just a few generations ago. From high-quality streaming to live-feeds across social medias, all apps and solutions we take for granted these days run on data.

More precisely, the apps run on real-time data from different sources, shaped in different forms. It's no exaggeration to say that an application's usefulness is often judged by its ability to move, use, and manage all kinds of data.

In order to achieve the goals described above and attract user attention, applications need new solutions and approaches to handling data. Simple and reliable but, in a few regards, quite limited SQL databases simply won't do. We need something more – we need NoSQL.

But what do we mean by SQL or NoSQL? We already looked at this a while ago on this course, but now it's time to explore them further.

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### SQL or NoSQL?
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

### SQL (Structured Query Language) Databases

SQL databases are relational database management systems (RDBMS) that organize and store data in tables with predefined schemas. They use a structured query language (SQL) for defining and manipulating data. SQL databases are best suited for situations in which data relationships are well-defined, and transactions demand consistency and ACID properties (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability).

#### Key Characteristics

1. **Structured Data**: SQL databases handle structured data with predefined schemas, ensuring data consistency and integrity.
2. **ACID Properties**: Transactions in SQL databases follow ACID properties, providing a high level of data reliability.
3. **Normalization**: Emphasizes normalization to eliminate redundancy in data storage.

Online retail platforms, dealing with a vast inventory of products, customer transactions, and order processing, benefit from the structured nature and ACID properties of SQL databases.

### NoSQL (Not Only Structured Query Language) Databases

NoSQL databases encompass various database management systems that depart from the traditional relational model. They offer flexibility in data storage and retrieval, allowing for dynamic and unstructured data. NoSQL databases are suitable for scenarios with evolving data structures, distributed systems, and scalability requirements.

#### Key Characteristics

1. **Flexible Schema**: NoSQL databases allow dynamic and evolving data models, accommodating changes without a predefined schema.
2. **Scalability**: Designed for horizontal scalability, making them suitable for applications with unpredictable workloads and growing datasets.
3. **Diverse Data Models**: Support various data models like document-oriented, key-value pairs, column-family, and graph databases.

Social media analytics platforms, processing and analyzing vast amounts of unstructured and dynamic data generated by users, typically leverage the flexibility and scalability of NoSQL databases.

### Comparison: SQL vs. NoSQL

<!--Edukamu-table alkaa-->
<edukamu-section class="edukamu-table-colored-headers edukamu-table-scrollable">
<edukamu-table>
<edukamu-table-head>
<edukamu-table-row>

<edukamu-table-header>
**Criteria**
</edukamu-table-header>

<edukamu-table-header>
**SQL Databases**
</edukamu-table-header>

<edukamu-table-header>
**NoSQL Databases**
</edukamu-table-header>

</edukamu-table-head>
</edukamu-table-row>

<edukamu-table-body>
<edukamu-table-row>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Data Structure
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Structured data with predefined schemas
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Dynamic and evolving data models with flexible schemas
</edukamu-table-cell>
</edukamu-table-body>
</edukamu-table-row>

<edukamu-table-body>
<edukamu-table-row>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Query Language
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
SQL
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Varies by database type (e.g., JSON for document-oriented)
</edukamu-table-cell>
</edukamu-table-body>
</edukamu-table-row>

<edukamu-table-body>
<edukamu-table-row>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Scalability
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Typically vertical scaling
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Horizontal scaling to handle large and distributed data
</edukamu-table-cell>
</edukamu-table-body>
</edukamu-table-row>

<edukamu-table-body>
<edukamu-table-row>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Consistency
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
ACID properties for strong consistency
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Eventual consistency with trade-offs based on use case
</edukamu-table-cell>
</edukamu-table-body>
</edukamu-table-row>

<edukamu-table-body>
<edukamu-table-row>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Use Cases
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Well-defined data relationships
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Rapidly changing data, distributed systems, scalability
</edukamu-table-cell>
</edukamu-table-body>
</edukamu-table-row>

<edukamu-table-body>
<edukamu-table-row>
<edukamu-table-cell>
Example Database
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle
</edukamu-table-cell>
<edukamu-table-cell>
MongoDB, Cassandra, Redis, Neo4j, DynamoDB
</edukamu-table-cell>
</edukamu-table-body>
</edukamu-table-row>

</edukamu-table>
</edukamu-section>
<edukamu-section class="edukamu-included-only-in-mobile">
<edukamu-section class="edukamu-kuvateksti">
The Table above is horizontally scrollable.
</edukamu-section>
</edukamu-section>
<br>

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>


In summary, SQL databases excel in scenarios in which data relationships are well-defined and transactions require a high level of consistency. On the other hand, NoSQL databases offer flexibility, scalability, and adaptability to changing data structures, making them suitable for dynamic and distributed applications.

The choice between SQL and NoSQL depends on the specific requirements and characteristics of the application. They’re both capable and important tools, but on this course, our interest is on the latter. But why should developers go for NoSQL if SQL is easier to manage and understand?

Let's look at this by exploring a scenario with which the most of us are already familiar: streaming services.


<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Scenario: Streaming and NoSQL
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

Consider a streaming service that caters to millions of users globally, each with unique preferences and viewing histories. This service generates a vast amount of data in real-time, including user interactions, content recommendations, and viewing habits.

In order to make full use of all the data and provide users with enjoyable recommendations quickly, a NoSQL database is the ideal solution for various reasons:

**1. Dynamic and Evolving Data:** Streaming services often encounter rapidly changing data, with new content, user interactions, and preferences emerging continuously. NoSQL's flexible schema - in other words, the way in which the data is configured and managed - allows the service to adapt to these changes without disrupting the user experience.

**2. Scalability for Global Reach:** With users scattered across the globe, a streaming service requires horizontal scalability to handle increasing loads and ensure low-latency access. NoSQL databases, designed for seamless scalability, enable the service to distribute data efficiently and maintain responsiveness. That way, users can keep on watching regardless of the time or location.

**3. Diverse Data Models:** Streaming services deal with diverse data types, including user profiles, content metadata, and real-time interactions. NoSQL's support for various data models allows the service to manage this diversity effectively, from storing user preferences (document-oriented) to tracking content relationships (graph-based).

**4. Quick Iteration for Recommendations:** NoSQL's agility empowers the streaming service to iterate quickly on recommendation algorithms. The service can experiment with new features, adapt content suggestions, and incorporate user feedback in real-time without cumbersome schema modifications.

By leveraging NoSQL data, the streaming service optimizes its data management strategy to meet the demands of a dynamic and globally distributed user base, ensuring a seamless and personalized streaming experience for users.

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>

<edukamu-section class="slate-section slate-pink">
If a streaming service opted for SQL instead of NoSQL, the impacts on the user experience would be clear. Whereas opting for SQL could, theoretically, provide a structured and consistent user experience, it would also take its toll on the rapidness and versatility.

Using SQL could cause delays in real-time updates, complexity in generating recommendations, and challenges in scaling seamlessly with increasing user demand. The impact on users would be felt in terms of the service's adaptability, responsiveness, and the level of personalization offered.

It's important to notice that both SQL and NoSQL are capable and modern database solutions. Making the choice depends on the use scenario, with both involving trade-offs based on the application's characteristics and needs.

In essence, though, NoSQL databases are much more flexible for scenarios in which the application's contents need to be updated quickly while still remaining personalized for each individual user.

After this initial review, let's start shifting our focus to NoSQL. Azure Cosmos DB is one of the best solutions for implementing NoSQL databases. Let's find out more, shall we?
</edukamu-section>
<br>

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

Let's take a quick tour around Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL, shall we? We'll start by reviewing a few concepts, some of which might already be familiar to you, in this context.

### What is a NoSQL Database?

Developers require new kinds of databases that can address the unique challenges of modern apps. NoSQL databases were designed to address needs such as:

- High volumes of data.
- Data with many different sources and forms.
- Dynamic data schemas that store different types of data.
- Using high-velocity and/or real-time data.

You define NoSQL databases by the common characteristics they share rather than by a specific formal definition. These characteristics include:

- A nonrelational data store.
- Being designed to scale out.
- Not enforcing a specific schema.

Generally, NoSQL databases don't enforce relational constraints or put locks on data, making writes fast. Also, they're often designed to horizontally scale via sharding or partitioning, which allows them to maintain high-performance regardless of size.

While there are many NoSQL data models, four broad data model families are commonly used when modeling data in a NoSQL database:

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module1/2-nosql-db.png" alt="Diagram showing various NoSQL models including; a key-value, document, graph, and column-family store." style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;">
<br>

Moving forward, we focus on the data model supported by Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL: The *document* data model.

### NoSQL Database with Document Data Model

The document data model breaks data down into individual document entities. A document can be any structured data type, but JSON is commonly used as the data format. The Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL supports JSON natively.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module1/2-document-db.png" alt="Illustration of a hierarchical document data model that includes parent entities, child entities, and lines connecting them." style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;">
<br>

A document is an atomic entity and can have its own data form, regardless of what is stored in other documents in the same database. Because of this flexibility, there's no need for a predefined schema making it easier to build new applications rapidly. Additionally, this flexibility enables scenarios where different types of data can be stored together and where models can evolve over the lifetime of an application.

### JSON Documents

JavaScript Object Notation, or JSON, is a lightweight data format. JSON was built to be highly compatible with the literal notation of an object in the JavaScript language. Many frameworks, browsers, and even databases support JavaScript natively making JSON a popular format for transmitting and storing data.

Here's an example of a JSON document:

```JavaScript
{
  "device": {
    "type": "mobile"
  },
  "sentTime": "2019-11-12T13:08:42",
  "spoolRefs": [
    "6a86682c-be5a-4a4a-bacd-96c4d1c7ece6",
    "79e78fe2-93aa-4688-89db-a7278b034aa6"
  ]
}
```

As you can see, JSON is a relatively readable data format that clearly exposes its content. JSON is also relatively easy to parse and use in JavaScript applications.

### Summary: Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL

Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is a fast NoSQL database service that offers rich querying over diverse data. It helps deliver configurable and reliable performance, is globally distributed, and enables rapid development.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module1/2-azure-cosmos-db.png" alt="Illustration of a world map with four globally distributed nodes that are connected via lines.">
<br>

The NoSQL API is the core or native API for working with documents. The NoSQL API supports fast, flexible development utilizing JSON documents, a query language with a familiar syntax, and client libraries for popular programming languages. Azure Cosmos DB provides other APIs, such as Mongo, Gremlin, and Cassandra. These APIs offer compatibility with each database ecosystem, while still mapping to the same underlying infrastructure of the native NoSQL API.

Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL has a few advantages such as:

- **Guaranteed speed at any scale**—even through bursts—with instant, limitless elasticity, fast reads, and multi-master writes, anywhere in the world.
- **Fast, flexible app development** with SDKs for popular languages, a native NoSQL API along with APIs for MongoDB, Cassandra, and Gremlin, and no-ETL (extract, transform, load) analytics.
- **Ready for mission-critical applications** with guaranteed business continuity, 99.999-percent availability, and enterprise-grade security.
- **Fully managed and cost-effective serverless database** with instant, automatic scaling that responds to application needs.

These capabilities make Azure Cosmos DB ideally suited for modern application development. Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is especially suited for applications that:

- Experience unpredictable spikes and dips in traffic
- Generate lots of data
- Need to deliver real-time user experiences
- Are depended upon for business continuity

The Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL can arbitrarily store native JSON documents with flexible schema. Data is indexed automatically and is available for query using a flavor of the SQL query language designed for JSON data. The NoSQL API can be accessed using SDKs for popular frameworks such as .NET, Python, Java, and Node.js.

</edukamu-collapse>

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### When to use Cosmos DB for NoSQL?
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

As a fast NoSQL database with a flexible API, Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is well suited for high-performance applications with global ambition. Speed and flexibility make Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL great for web, retail, IoT, gaming, and mobile applications. Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is a good fit for applications that require flexibility, low response time, and transactions at massive volume or velocity.

### Case 1: IoT/Telemetry

IoT sensor workloads can be diverse and unpredictable. These workloads require a database platform that is responsive and capable of elastic scale to meet the needs of as many, or as few, data collection devices deployed at any point in time. In many cases, IoT workloads can also write massive volumes of data and would benefit from a write-optimized database platform. Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is optimized for write-heavy workloads. Operations on a single document are atomic with fast and predictable indexed write speeds. Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is also globally distributed and elastic to meet the needs of various IoT workloads.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module1/4-iot-case.png" alt="Architectural diagram for an IoT workload showing increasing numbers of IoT device sensors sending data to an Azure IoT Hub. Azure Databricks then ingests and aggregates the real-time data in JSON format for storage in Azure Cosmos DB. Finally, Azure Synapse Analytics is used to perform a deeper analysis of the data stored in Azure Cosmos DB." style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;">
<br>

In this example, a growing number of IoT devices are sending sensor data to an Azure IoT Hub. Azure Stream Analytics then ingests and aggregates the data for storage in Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL. Azure Synapse Analytics then performs near real-time analysis over the data using Azure Synapse Link for Azure Cosmos DB.

### Case 2: Retail/Marketing

Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is a great fit for retail and marketing workloads that can experience dramatic and unexpected swings in usage at any point throughout the year. The elastic scale of Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL ensures that the database platform can handle requests during peak usage, and save money during nonpeak times.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module1/4-retail-case.png" alt="Architectural diagram for a retail workload showing a user browser connecting to the website on Azure App Service supported by an Azure Blob Storage account containing static site data. Behind the scenes, an Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL account with a container for inventory data and a container for shopping cart data is used by the App Service Web App and an Azure Search instance that builds a searchable catalog by indexing the Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL account with inventory data." style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;">
<br>

In this example, a JavaScript web application, built on content stored in Azure Blob Storage, uses Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL as it's backing database. Multiple accounts are used to manage different facets of the solution such as the shopping cart, inventory, or catalog. The solution then uses Azure Search to index the Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL data, providing a rich search experience to end users.

### Case 3: Web/Mobile Development

Many modern social applications generate a plethora of user-generated content that is diverse in quantity, shape, and volume. Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is a great candidate for this workload as this API can store data of varying schemas. Consider the NoSQL API for data that may have schemas that change or evolve over time as the company's initiatives expand into new areas.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module1/4-web-case.png" alt="Architectural diagram for a web workload showing a user browser connecting to a URL that is connected to Azure Traffic Manager to determine the correct redirect destination. Then three Azure App Service instances in three Azure regions (North Europe, West US, East US) are connected to a globally distributed Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL account." style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;">
<br>

In this example, a user is using a URL to access a web site in their browser. The URL points to Azure Traffic Manager, which then uses a built-in algorithm to determine which Azure App Service endpoint to redirect the user to. Since Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL is capable of global distribution, you only need one account that is replicated across multiple regions.

### Scenario

Imagine yourself in the following scenario:

*You work as the lead developer at a retail company. Your team is building your online storefront. You're designing the new storefront to be accessible across various devices including mobile. The team expects a spike in demand when the storefront is published and various "grand opening" sales begin.*

One key part of your store's success is the ability for the company to notify users of shipping updates regardless of what device they place the order on or are currently using. Your team has worked hard on a sophisticated system to manage detailed order status tracking. The tight integration of Azure Cosmos DB with other Azure services, let's you consider building solutions that use order data in Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL to send notification to your user's mobile devices. The notifications alert them when their package ships, or is out for delivery.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module1/4-retail-scenario.png" alt="Architectural diagram for a retail workload showing a growing number of users ordering products and a collection of compute resources handling requests from the storefront instances. Behind the compute resources, Azure Cosmos DB stores purchase data. Then, Azure Synapse Link connects Azure Cosmos DB to Azure Synapse Analytics for deeper analytics. Finally, Azure Functions, triggered off of change feed, processing data events that then trigger an Azure Logic Apps workflow to perform business operations such as notifying the user on their mobile device of new events." style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;">
<br>

This example is similar to the example from the introduction earlier. To build on the first example, your team has decided to introduce Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL as the database of choice. Now, your team can use Azure Synapse Link to prepare and aggregate data for deeper analysis using Azure Synapse Analytics. Your team can also use services such as Azure Functions to react to data events with Azure Cosmos DB, and then trigger an Azure Logic Apps workflow that sends notifications to mobile devices.

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>


That, in a nutshell, is Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL. We'll spend the rest of this course focusing on its capabilities across different scenarios, but now it's time to recap everything we've learned so far!


<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="tehtava">
### Exercise: SQL and NoSQL
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

Answer the following questions.

<edukamu-text-poll url="/exercises/module1/exploring-global-databases-text-poll-1.yaml" id="1gk62lc9i3bm02m4">

<edukamu-text-poll url="/exercises/module1/exploring-global-databases-text-poll-2.yaml" id="ji0wmdltif9ip6fy">

<edukamu-text-poll url="/exercises/module1/exploring-global-databases-text-poll-3.yaml" id="eo8pia38roavm7ox">

<edukamu-text-poll url="/exercises/module1/exploring-global-databases-text-poll-4.yaml" id="k0ifmklxkow79f6z">

<edukamu-text-poll url="/exercises/module1/exploring-global-databases-text-poll-5.yaml" id="lbbbrg5jyuh4398i">

Now you have the opportunity to go back and **review your answers** and compare them to the example solutions. If you have finished the tasks, please refresh the page by pressing the button below, to make sure example solutions are visible to you.

<edukamu-link class="edukamu-button white-text" title="Refresh" url="/1/exploring-global-databases?question=1gk62lc9i3bm02m4">Refresh the page</edukamu-link>
<br>

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>


We're off to a great start, aren't we? On the next page, we'll explore Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL a bit further, component by component.

<br>
<edukamu-image url="/graphics/progress-pallo-grafiikat/da-4mod-progress1-2-3.png" alt="Edukamu-progress-in-a-module-image">
