## Azure OpenAI Services

As mentioned previously, OpenAI is the research company behind the popular ChatGPT service as well as the GPT-4 large language model also used and endorsed by Microsoft.

On this page, we’ll take a more comprehensive look into the services provided within Azure OpenAI.

But first let’s circle back to the question you were asked on the previous page. (Is the content generated by generative AI actually new?) Remember?

You see, generative AI is creating its content by combining bits and pieces of information it has learned during the training. Let’s call these bits and pieces building blocks. And if all building blocks already existed before the model combined them, is it actually putting together anything new at all or just reusing what was used before?

There’s no final answer on that question, but it’s an interesting one to ponder!

Without further ado, let’s get to it: Welcome to the world of Azure OpenAI Service!

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Introduction to Azure OpenAI Service
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

Azure OpenAI Service is Microsoft's cloud solution for deploying, customizing, and hosting large language models. It brings together the best of OpenAI's cutting edge models and APIs with the security and scalability of the Azure cloud platform. Microsoft's partnership with OpenAI enables Azure OpenAI users to access the latest language model innovations.

Azure OpenAI supports many models that can serve different needs. These models include:
* **GPT-4 models** are the latest generation of *generative pretrained* (GPT) models that can generate natural language and code completions based on natural language prompts.
* **GPT 3.5 models** can generate natural language and code completions based on natural language prompts. In particular, **GPT-35-turbo** models are optimized for chat-based interactions and work well in most generative AI scenarios.
* **Embeddings models** convert text into numeric vectors, and are useful in language analytics scenarios such as comparing text sources for similarities.
* **DALL-E models** are used to generate images based on natural language prompts. Currently, DALL-E models are in preview. DALL-E models aren't listed in the Azure OpenAI Studio interface and don't need to be explicitly deployed.

Models differ by speed, cost, and how well they complete specific tasks. You can learn more about the differences and latest models offered in the [Azure OpenAI Service documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/concepts/models)(target="_blank").

In many cases, models can be used as-is. For example, in Azure OpenAI Service, you can deploy a GPT-4 model and immediately start using it from an application. However, you can also use an existing model as a foundational model - a starting point for further training with your own data. This approach is called fine-tuning, and it enables you to train a custom model that builds on the pre-trained model, but which is tuned to data that is relevant for your particular scenario. For example, a legal firm might fine-tune a model with the text from existing contracts and other proprietary legal documents to train a model that is optimized for generating contractual content.

### Azure AI Studio

Developers can work with these models in Azure AI Studio, a web-based environment where AI professionals can deploy, test, and manage LLMs that support generative AI app development on Azure.

On the image below, you see the main view of Azure OpenAI Service.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module4/studio-portal.png" alt="Screenshot of Azure OpenAI Studio home page."> <!--style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;"-->
<!-- <edukamu-section class="edukamu-kuvateksti">
A table and its properties.
</edukamu-section> -->
<br> 

Within Azure AI Studio, you can deploy large language models, provide few-shot examples, and test them in Azure OpenAI Studio's Chat playground.

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module4/azure-openai-chat-playground.png" alt="Screenshot of Azure OpenAI Studio chat playground." style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;" modal="true">
<edukamu-section class="edukamu-kuvateksti">
You can click the image to view a bigger version.
</edukamu-section>
<br> 

This is a great place to once again remind you to explore all these services as much as possible, if you have an active Azure subscription. You can never know (and try out) too much!

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>


Imagine how useful it would be if you could harness the power of generative AI and combine its immense calculating power and analyzing capabilities with your human-level imagination?

Actually, this all is possible already, thanks to copilots.

Let’s waste no time and move straight on to Copilots!

<br>
<edukamu-image url="/graphics/progress-pallo-grafiikat/da-4mod-progress1-2.png" alt="Edukamu-progress-in-a-module-image">
