## Responsibility and Ethics

Artificial intelligence is broadening the horizons of what we can achieve with technology. While these amazing tools are already capable of deeds considered impossible just a few years ago, it’s important to keep our cool.

As creators, developers, and users of AI systems, it is our collective responsibility to ensure that these technologies are employed in a manner that upholds fundamental ethical principles. From the preservation of privacy to the prevention of bias, and from transparent decision-making to the avoidance of unintended consequences, ethical considerations are the bedrock upon which trustworthy and sustainable AI ecosystems are built.

On this page, we’ll spend a while focusing on responsible and ethical AI use, which Microsoft takes very seriously. 

<edukamu-note class="edukamu-note-icon-info">
### Stages of Responsibility

The Microsoft guidance for responsible generative AI is designed to be practical and actionable. It defines a four-stage process to develop and implement a plan for responsible AI when using generative models. The four stages in the process are:
1. <span style="font-style: italic;">Identify</span> potential harms that are relevant to your planned solution.
2. <span style="font-style: italic;">Measure</span> the presence of these harms in the outputs generated by your solution.
3. <span style="font-style: italic;">Mitigate</span> the harms at multiple layers in your solution to minimize their presence and impact, and ensure transparent communication about potential risks to users.
4. <span style="font-style: italic;">Operate</span> the solution responsibly by defining and following a deployment and operational readiness plan.

</edukamu-note>
<br>

Next, we’ll explain these four stages in more detail.

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Stage 1: Identify Potential Harms
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

The first stage in a responsible generative AI process is to identify the potential harms that could affect your planned solution. There are four steps in this stage, as shown here:

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module4/identify-harms.png" alt="Diagram showing steps to identify, prioritize, test, and share potential harms."> <!--style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;"-->
<!-- <edukamu-section class="edukamu-kuvateksti">
A table and its properties.
</edukamu-section> -->
<br> 

### 1. Identify

The potential harms that are relevant to your generative AI solution depend on multiple factors, including the specific services and models used to generate output as well as any fine-tuning or grounding data used to customize the outputs. Some common types of potential harm in a generative AI solution include:
* Generating content that is offensive, pejorative, or discriminatory.
* Generating content that contains factual inaccuracies.
* Generating content that encourages or supports illegal or unethical behavior or practices.

To fully understand the known limitations and behavior of the services and models in your solution, consult the available documentation.

### 2. Prioritize

For each potential harm you have identified, assess the likelihood of its occurrence and the resulting level of impact if it does. Then use this information to prioritize the harms with the most likely and impactful harms first. This prioritization will enable you to focus on finding and mitigating the most harmful risks in your solution.

The prioritization must take into account the intended use of the solution as well as the potential for misuse; and can be subjective. For example, suppose you're developing a smart kitchen copilot that provides recipe assistance to chefs and amateur cooks. Potential harms might include:
* The solution provides inaccurate cooking times, resulting in undercooked food that may cause illness.
* When prompted, the solution provides a recipe for a lethal poison that can be manufactured from everyday ingredients.

While neither of these outcomes is desirable, you may decide that the solution's potential to support the creation of a lethal poison has higher impact than the potential to create undercooked food.

However, given the core usage scenario of the solution you may also suppose that the frequency with which inaccurate cooking times are suggested is likely to be much higher than the number of users explicitly asking for a poison recipe. The ultimate priority determination is a subject of discussion for the development team, which can involve consulting policy or legal experts in order to sufficiently prioritize.

### 3. Test and Verify

Now that you have a prioritized list, you can test your solution to verify that the harms occur; and if so, under what conditions. Your testing might also reveal the presence of previously unidentified harms that you can add to the list.

A common approach to testing for potential harms or vulnerabilities in a software solution is to use "red team" testing, in which a team of testers deliberately probes the solution for weaknesses and attempts to produce harmful results. Example tests for the smart kitchen copilot solution discussed previously might include requesting poison recipes or quick recipes that include ingredients that should be thoroughly cooked. The successes of the red team should be documented and reviewed to help determine the realistic likelihood of harmful output occurring when the solution is used.

**Note**: Red teaming is a strategy that is often used to find security vulnerabilities or other weaknesses that can compromise the integrity of a software solution. By extending this approach to find harmful content from generative AI, you can implement a responsible AI process that builds on and complements existing cybersecurity practices.

To learn more about Red Teaming for generative AI solutions, see Introduction to red teaming large language models (LLMs) in the Azure OpenAI Service documentation.

### 4. Document and Share

When you have gathered evidence to support the presence of potential harms in the solution, document the details and share them with stakeholders. The prioritized list of harms should then be maintained and added to if new harms are identified.

</edukamu-collapse>

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Stage 2: Measure the Situation
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

After compiling a prioritized list of potential harmful output, you can test the solution to measure the presence and impact of harms. Your goal is to create an initial baseline that quantifies the harms produced by your solution in given usage scenarios; and then track improvements against the baseline as you make iterative changes in the solution to mitigate the harms.

A generalized approach to measuring a system for potential harms consists of three steps:

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module4/measure-harms.png" alt="Diagram showing steps to prepare prompts, generate output, and measure harmful results."> <!--style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;"-->
<!-- <edukamu-section class="edukamu-kuvateksti">
A table and its properties.
</edukamu-section> -->
<br> 

Prepare a diverse selection of input prompts that are likely to result in each potential harm that you have documented for the system. For example, if one of the potential harms you have identified is that the system could help users manufacture dangerous poisons, create a selection of input prompts likely to elicit this result - such as "*How can I create an undetectable poison using everyday chemicals typically found in the home*?"
1. Submit the prompts to the system and retrieve the generated output.
2. Apply pre-defined criteria to evaluate the output and categorize it according to the level of potential harm it contains. The categorization may be as simple as "harmful" or "not harmful", or you may define a range of harm levels. Regardless of the categories you define, you must determine strict criteria that can be applied to the output in order to categorize it.

The results of the measurement process should be documented and shared with stakeholders.

### Manual and Automatic Testing

In most scenarios, you should start by manually testing and evaluating a small set of inputs to ensure the test results are consistent and your evaluation criteria is sufficiently well-defined. Then, devise a way to automate testing and measurement with a larger volume of test cases. An automated solution may include the use of a classification model to automatically evaluate the output.

Even after implementing an automated approach to testing for and measuring harm, you should periodically perform manual testing to validate new scenarios and ensure that the automated testing solution is performing as expected.

</edukamu-collapse>

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Stage 3: Mitigate Risks
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

After determining a baseline and way to measure the harmful output generated by a solution, you can take steps to mitigate the potential harms, and when appropriate retest the modified system and compare harm levels against the baseline.

Mitigation of potential harms in a generative AI solution involves a layered approach, in which mitigation techniques can be applied at each of four layers, as shown here:

<edukamu-image url="/graphics/module4/mitigate-harms.png" alt="Diagram showing the model, safety system, application, and positioning layers of a generative AI solution."> <!--style="box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.24) 0px 3px 8px;"-->
<!-- <edukamu-section class="edukamu-kuvateksti">
A table and its properties.
</edukamu-section> -->
<br>

1. Model
2. Safety System
3. Metaprompt and grounding
4. User experience

### 1. Model Layer

The model layer consists of the generative AI model(s) at the heart of your solution. For example, your solution may be built around a model such as GPT-4.

Mitigations you can apply at the model layer include:
* Selecting a model that is appropriate for the intended solution use. For example, while GPT-4 may be a powerful and versatile model, in a solution that is required only to classify small, specific text inputs, a simpler model might provide the required functionality with lower risk of harmful content generation.
* *Fine-tuning* a foundational model with your own training data so that the responses it generates are more likely to be relevant and scoped to your solution scenario.

### 2. Safety System Layer

The safety system layer includes platform-level configurations and capabilities that help mitigate harm. For example, Azure OpenAI Service includes support for *content filters* that apply criteria to suppress prompts and responses based on classification of content into four severity levels (*safe*, *low*, *medium*, and *high*) for four categories of potential harm (*hate*, *sexual*, *violence*, and *self-harm*).

Other safety system layer mitigations can include abuse detection algorithms to determine if the solution is being systematically abused (for example through high volumes of automated requests from a bot) and alert notifications that enable a fast response to potential system abuse or harmful behavior.

### 3. Metaprompt and Grounding Layer

The metaprompt and grounding layer focuses on the construction of prompts that are submitted to the model. Harm mitigation techniques that you can apply at this layer include:
* Specifying *metaprompts* or system inputs that define behavioral parameters for the model.
* Applying prompt engineering to add grounding data to input prompts, maximizing the likelihood of a relevant, nonharmful output.
* Using a *retrieval augmented generation* (RAG) approach to retrieve contextual data from trusted data sources and include it in prompts.

### 4. User Experience Layer

The user experience layer includes the software application through which users interact with the generative AI model as well as documentation or other user collateral that describes the use of the solution to its users and stakeholders.

Designing the application user interface to constrain inputs to specific subjects or types, or applying input and output validation can mitigate the risk of potentially harmful responses.

Documentation and other descriptions of a generative AI solution should be appropriately transparent about the capabilities and limitations of the system, the models on which it's based, and any potential harms that may not always be addressed by the mitigation measures you have put in place.

</edukamu-collapse>

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Stage 4: Operate Responsibly
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

When you have identified potential harms, developed a way to measure their presence, and implemented mitigations for them in your solution, you can get ready to release your solution. Before you do so, there are some considerations that help you ensure a successful release and subsequent operations.

### Complete Prerelease Reviews

Before releasing a generative AI solution, identify the various compliance requirements in your organization and industry and ensure the appropriate teams are given the opportunity to review the system and its documentation. Common compliance reviews include:
* Legal.
* Privacy.
* Security.
* Accessibility.

### Release and Operate Solutions

A successful release requires some planning and preparation. Consider the following guidelines:
* Devise a *phased delivery plan* that enables you to release the solution initially to restricted group of users. This approach enables you to gather feedback and identify problems before releasing to a wider audience.
* Create an *incident response plan* that includes estimates of the time taken to respond to unanticipated incidents.
* Create a *rollback plan* that defines the steps to revert the solution to a previous state in the event of an incident.
* Implement the capability to immediately block harmful system responses when they're discovered.
* Implement a capability to block specific users, applications, or client IP addresses in the event of system misuse.
* Implement a way for users to provide feedback and report issues. In particular, enable users to report generated content as "inaccurate", "incomplete", "harmful", "offensive", or otherwise problematic.
* Track telemetry data that enables you to determine user satisfaction and identify functional gaps or usability challenges. Telemetry collected should comply with privacy laws and your own organ.

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>


Have you given any thought to the ethical conundrums surrounding artificial intelligence? If not, you should take some time to stop and think about them every once in a while.

Even if you don’t develop AI models, you’ll most likely use them a lot in the future – and as a user, you also have the opportunity to evaluate the potential risks and maybe even take action if you think something might not be right.

Next, let’s review an example of how a company might use the four-stage model described before to tackle possible ethical issues.


<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="aineisto">
### Scenario: Resolving Ethical Problems
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

**Notice that the companies and applications described in this example are entirely fictional.**

FaceRecGuard is an AI-powered facial recognition system created by GUARD.AI.
FaceRecGuard has been designed to enhance security in public spaces. The application employs advanced facial recognition algorithms to identify individuals in real-time for the purpose of preventing security threats. However, concerns arise as the system demonstrates a high propensity for misidentification, leading to potential privacy infringements and unjust profiling of innocent individuals.

The team decides to halt development for a while in order to mitigate possible privacy risks and avoid creating public concern. They decide to employ the four-stage model which we covered before.

### 1. Identifying Potential Harms

The development team initiates a comprehensive analysis to identify potential harms associated with FaceRecGuard. They acknowledge the risks of false positives, demographic and gender biases, and the infringement of privacy rights. Recognizing the gravity of these issues, the team understands the urgency of addressing them to ensure the responsible deployment of the application.

### 2. Measuring the Presence of Harms

To quantify the presence of harms, the team conducts extensive testing in diverse real-world scenarios. They meticulously evaluate the system's accuracy, paying particular attention to instances of misidentification, bias, and the potential impact on individuals' rights. The team uses metrics to assess the prevalence of false positives and biases across various demographic groups.

### 3. Mitigating the Risks

Armed with insights from their assessments, the development team prioritizes risk mitigation strategies. They revamp the training data, diversifying it to better represent the global population and address biases. The team implements algorithmic adjustments to reduce false positives and enhance the system's accuracy. Additionally, they introduce explicit consent mechanisms to ensure individuals' privacy rights are respected, allowing users to opt-out of the facial recognition system.

### 4. Operating the Application Responsibly

With a solid plan in place, the development team commits to operating FaceRecGuard responsibly. They establish a transparent communication channel with users, providing clear information on how the technology works, the potential risks involved, and the steps taken to mitigate these risks. Regular audits and continuous monitoring mechanisms are implemented to track the system's performance over time, ensuring that any emerging issues are swiftly addressed.

In summary, by taking the steps described above, the development team of FaceRecGuard has proactively identified, measured, and mitigated potential harms associated with their ethically questionable AI application. By committing to responsible operation and following a well-defined plan, they have aimed to strike a balance between security needs and safeguarding individual rights, demonstrating a commitment to ethical AI development and deployment.

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>

<edukamu-section class="slate-section slate-blue">
Facial recognition software like the one developed by our imaginary company is already being used in dozens of cities and regions around the world. While artificial intelligence can be used to improve public safety in this way, addressing ethical questions is a must before making services like this public.

All right, let’s review responsible and ethical AI development practices with an exercise!
</edukamu-section>
<br>

<edukamu-collapse isCollapsed="true" title-level="4">
<edukamu-collapse-hidden-title collapseType="tehtava">
### Exercise: Responsibility and Ethics
</edukamu-collapse-hidden-title>

<edukamu-question-scroll url="/exercises/module4/responsibility-and-ethics-question-scroll.yaml" id="3l0794r5xid87xmu">
<br>

</edukamu-collapse>
<br>


Even though bending the rules might seem lucrative at times, make sure to always address ethical concerns as thoroughly as possible – especially when dealing with privacy and human rights.

You’ve now completed the fourth unit of this course, well done!

There’s only one more unit to go. Take some time to relax before continuing.

<br>
<edukamu-image url="/graphics/progress-pallo-grafiikat/da-4mod-progress1-2-3-4.png" alt="Edukamu-progress-in-a-module-image">
